Google 



This is a digital copy of a book that was preserved for generations on library shelves before it was carefully scanned by Google as part of a project 

to make the world's books discoverable online. 

It has survived long enough for the copyright to expire and the book to enter the public domain. A public domain book is one that was never subject 

to copyright or whose legal copyright term has expired. Whether a book is in the public domain may vary country to country. Public domain books 

are our gateways to the past, representing a wealth of history, culture and knowledge that's often difficult to discover. 

Marks, notations and other maiginalia present in the original volume will appear in this file - a reminder of this book's long journey from the 

publisher to a library and finally to you. 

Usage guidelines 

Google is proud to partner with libraries to digitize public domain materials and make them widely accessible. Public domain books belong to the 
public and we are merely their custodians. Nevertheless, this work is expensive, so in order to keep providing tliis resource, we liave taken steps to 
prevent abuse by commercial parties, including placing technical restrictions on automated querying. 
We also ask that you: 

+ Make non-commercial use of the files We designed Google Book Search for use by individuals, and we request that you use these files for 
personal, non-commercial purposes. 

+ Refrain fivm automated querying Do not send automated queries of any sort to Google's system: If you are conducting research on machine 
translation, optical character recognition or other areas where access to a large amount of text is helpful, please contact us. We encourage the 
use of public domain materials for these purposes and may be able to help. 

+ Maintain attributionTht GoogXt "watermark" you see on each file is essential for in forming people about this project and helping them find 
additional materials through Google Book Search. Please do not remove it. 

+ Keep it legal Whatever your use, remember that you are responsible for ensuring that what you are doing is legal. Do not assume that just 
because we believe a book is in the public domain for users in the United States, that the work is also in the public domain for users in other 
countries. Whether a book is still in copyright varies from country to country, and we can't offer guidance on whether any specific use of 
any specific book is allowed. Please do not assume that a book's appearance in Google Book Search means it can be used in any manner 
anywhere in the world. Copyright infringement liabili^ can be quite severe. 

About Google Book Search 

Google's mission is to organize the world's information and to make it universally accessible and useful. Google Book Search helps readers 
discover the world's books while helping authors and publishers reach new audiences. You can search through the full text of this book on the web 

at |http: //books .google .com/I 



> 




WINDMILLS 



AND 



WIND MOTORS 

HOW TO 

BUILD AND RUN THEM 



BY 

F. E. POWELL 



Folly Illustrated with Detail Drawimo* 




NEW YORK 

SPON & CHAMBERLAIN 

123-125 LIBERTY STREET 

1910 



(N<x 36.) 



• Copyright, 1910 

By SPON & CHAMBERLAIN 



GAMELOT PRESS. 444-46 Pearl Street, New York 



PREFACE 



I have endeavoured in the following pages not 
only to interest the practical amateur in a branch 
of mechanics unfortunately much neglected, but 
also to present a series of practical original de- 
signs that should prove useful to every reader 
from the youngest to the most advanced. This 
is admittedly a large undertaking, and would be 
of doubtful wisdom, but for the sparseness of the 
literature of the subject. There is, however, 
no other book in the language, large or small, 
dealing with the matter in the way here pre- 
sented, and indeed only one other, as far as I 
know, having the subject of windmills for its 
sole topic. I venture to hope therefore that this 
little book will help to arouse something of the 
interest the subject deserves but has not hitherto 
received. 

That I am right in claiming for the wind 
motor a more serious recognition I am con- 
vinced, and particularly is this the case in re- 
"•^rd to the model engineer. At present there 
every prejudice against wind-power on ac- 
count of its uncertainty, against which even its 

inexpensiveness has not been able to contend. 

... 
Ill 



IV PREFACE 

If it can once be realised, however, that the un- 
certainty can be reduced to little or no import- 
ance, so much that even a petrol-engine might 
seem unreliable and troublesome beside it, the 
claim put forward for the windmill is fully sub- 
stantiated. Not less than this is one of the aims 
of this little book, and it is one which I confi- 
dently expect will be upheld. 

In a book like this, trenching upon new ground, 
where every design has been the outcome of 
careful consideration unaided by the experience 
of others, it is not unlikely that errors or am- 
biguities may have crept in. The reader who 
finds any such, or who meets with difficulties of 
any sort, will confer a kindness by communicat- 
ing them to the author through the publishers. 

R E. POWELL. 



CONTENTS 



PAGE 

Preface iii 

CHAPTER I 

WINDMILL EVOLUTION 

Ancient post-mill. Tower mill. Tower mill 
with regulating or wind-wheel. Modern 
type of windmill. Anemometer. Jumbo or 
horizontal windmill. Wind-motor with ver- 
tical axle. The pantanemone i 

CHAPTER H 

A MODEL WORKING WINDMILL 

Tower mill type. Fixed sails without tail 
regulator. Diameter across sails, two feet. 
Full detailed drawings 1 1 

CHAPTER HI 

A SMALL AMERICAN TYPE WINDMILL 

This type has fixed metal sails three feet in 
diameter, with tail regulator. Develops 
about Yso H.P. Full detailed drawings 22 



VI CONTENTS 

CHAPTER IV 

A SMALL WORKING WINDMILL 

PAGE 

Automatically reversing sail type. Diameter 
across sails, six feet. Develops about Ko 
H.P. Suitable for pumping water or for 
running a lathe. Full detailed drawings. . . 37 

CHAPTER V 

A PRACTICAL WORKING WINDMILL 

A simple and compact wind-power motor with 
adjustable sails and tail regulator. Diam- 
eter across sails ten feet. Will develop 
from one-quarter to one-half horse-power, 
according to the velocity of the wind. Suit- 
able for pumping water, driving a dynamo 
or light farm machinery. Full detailed 
drawings 48 

CHAPTER VI 

PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY BY WIND-POWER 

Diagram of connections for a wind-driven 
electrical installation. Driving belt ar- 
rangement for wind electrical plant. Table 
of wind pressures and velocities 65 



CHAPTER I 
Windmill Evolution 

It is not a little strange that amateur engi- 
neers should have so neglected the windmill, 
either as a subject for model-making and experi- 
ment, or even for the more practical purpose 
of power production. Wind-power is free, and 
while it is admittedly erratic it must surely ap- 
peal to the mechanical, mind as a labour saver 
of some value. The probability is that the lack 
of simple published designs is the main reason 
for this state of things, and the aim of this little 
book is to remedy it. 

Few mechanical appliances have a simpler his- 
torical record than the windmill. Until com- 
paratively recent years only two main types of 
mill were ^9mmonly in use, known respectively 
^|nd the Tower mills, vhe former, 
is the earlier machine, was distinguished 
by the fact that the whole building, carrying 
sails, house, cap, and all machinery, was pivoted 
on a huge timber post, so that the whole struc- 
ture had to be removed when it was necessary 
to adjust the mill to face the windJ The Tower 
mill, called also the " Smock " and sometimes 
the " Frock " mill, was an improvement on the 




2 WISDMILLS- AXD WISD MOTORS 

Other in having the cap only to revolve, carrjing 
with it the sails and (later) the automatic regu- 
lating mechanism for bringing the sails round 




" into the wind." Illustrations of these two 
types of mills are given in figs, i and. 2. 
/ As hinted above, the automatic method of con- 
I trolling the mill so that the sails should face the 
1 wind was a fairly recent innovation. It dates 
I back to the middle of the eighteenth century, 



WINDMILL EVOLUTION 



when Andre w Meikle introduced the now well- 
ktlown auxiliary 'regulating wheel, which may 
be seen in fig. 3 




Fig. 2.— Tower Milt: at Hillerod, Denmark. 



Another advance in windmill construction was 
made in 1807, when Sir W, Cubitt introduced an 
automatic reefing arrangement for the sails. Be- 



4 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

fore that date speed was more or less outside 
the control of the operator, who could only throw 
in or out his machinery as the speed ranged too 




Fig. 3.— Towi 



with Regulating or Wind Wheel. 



high or too low, or by the application of brakes 
could keep it partly within bounds. 

The later history of the development of wind- 
mills must be looked for abroad. The inventor 
of the "American" mill is said to have been 
John Burnham, whose location is sufficiently in- 



WINDMILL EVOLUTION 5 

dicated in the name by which this type is known. 
The date was about the middle of the nineteenth 
century. Everyone knows that the distinction 
between the older types and the modem trans- 
atlantic machines lies in the number and dis- 
position of the sails, which in the latter are nu- 
merous and form a comparatively narrow ring of 
vanes. A modem example of such a mill Is 
illustrated in fig. 4. Since Bumham's day in- 
ventors have not been asleep, and the multitude 
of so-called American mills now on the market 
is evidence of their skill. These machines vary, 
however, only in details of design, regulation, 
and control, not in any essential character. 

The American mill, though not much more 
efficient than its older competitor, has the ad- 
vantages^of. cheapness, a more even turning move- 
inent, and easier starting. The defects, espe- 
cially^ in the matter of economy, of all types of 
windmills led to a very remarkable series of ex- 
periments which were carried out by the Danish 
Government from 1891 until the death of the 
chief investigator, Prof. Poul la Cour, in 1908, 
brought them to an end. The work done by 
this enthusiastic engineer included not only the 
improvement of windmill details,,.but also a prac- 
tiQal inquiry into the possibility of utilising 
W4nd-power in the production of electrical en- 
ergy. Much of the collected data is naturally 
negative in its results, but students of the sub- 
ject must always look with warm admiration on 



e WIin>HILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

the patient work of La Cour and the good sense 
of the State that assisted him 

As far as this book is concerned, the Danish 




Fig 4— Modern Tjpe of W mdmill 

experiments have one special bearing. They 
proved that for maximum f^wcr and speed the 
modern multi-sailed machines could not com- 



WlsnMlLL EVOLUTION 7 

pete with a four- 01 six-armed mill of modified 
design. This type is comparatively easy to con- 
struct in a modified form, and has so many ad- 
vantages that one or two designs in the follow- 
ing pages have been based upon it. 



Besides the standard types of windmills pre- 
iriously mentioned, many other wind motors 




Fig. S- 
Diagram of Anemometer. 



Fig. 6. 
Alternative Cups. 



have been suggested and used at times, and de- 
serve at least brief notice. One of the simplest 
of these is the ordinary anemometer used for 
measurement of wind velocities (see fig. 5). It 
consists of four hemispherical cups carried on 
cross-arms, which are pivoted at their junction 
and moved by the superior resistance offered by 
the concavity of any one of the cups facing the 
wind. It will of course start in a wind of any 
direction whatever in the plane of its revolution, 
but has no pretension to power production. The 



8 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

hemispheres may be replaced by small (tin) 
cones (fig. 6), which are more easily made. 

Another windmill of extreme simplicity, which 
has sometimes been made of a large size, illus- 
trated in fig. 7, is called a " Jumbo." The small 
illustration in the corner of fig. 7 is a diagram- 




Fie 7. — "Jumbo," or Horizontal Windmill. 

matic end view of this type of motor. Arrows 
show the direction of wind and of rotation. The 
action is sufficiently indicated in the sketch, and 
it need only be pointed out that the great dis- 
advantage is that it will only work with certain 
winds. It is also necessary to have a large open 
space free from trees or buildings if the best 
results are looked for. 



WINDMILL EVOLUTION 9 

A modified form of the last machine is that 
shown in fig. 8, which has four or more sails 
mounted on a vertical shaft and arranged with a 
semicircular shield which runs on a circular path 
so that the vanes can be acted upon by the wind 
on one side only. Obviously the advantage in 




Fta. 8,— Wind Motor with Vertical Axle. 



this case is that winds of any direction can be 
made to perform work, but the type has never 
been developed to any extent. 

Another wind motor worth illustrating is, 
however, rather more curious than useful. This 
is thcpaiitanemone, shown in fig, 9, It consists 
simply of two semicircular discs whose diam- 
eters are placed at right angles to one another, 
the shaft bejng between them, in the same plane 
as the diameters, but at 45° to each of them. 



to 



WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 



The amater may be interested to make a model 
on these lines, which, while without practical 
value, is interesting for the fact that the machine 
will start in wind of any direction. 

Other wind motors there are, of varying inter- 




Fic 9, — The Pantanenlone. 



est and usefulness, including a quite modern 
development on the lines of a turbine, which has 
not yet seen the light of a manufacturer's work- 
shop. Space, however, is too valuable to be 
given to any but well-tried designs, although 
much interesting experimental work remains to 
be done in this connection on systematic lines. 



CHAPTER II 

A Small Working Model Windmill. Tower 

Mill Type 

Considering the simplicity of a windmill model 
and the fact that it will not easily get out of 
order, it is surprising that more amateurs do 
not turn their hands to its construction. A 
windmill with sails of only 2 feet diameter, such 
as will now be described, will develop in even a 
moderate breeze fully as much power as an aver- 
age steam-engine with cylinder say i inch stroke 
by |-inch diameter, and will therefore be quite 
powerf ul e nough to drive a model workshop, 
work. a_ model crane, or do other similar light 
WQrk±_.An interesting combination suitable for 
outdoors, where of course the windmill must 
work, would be a model railway arranged on an 
incline so that by means of a long cord the mill 
might be made to draw up a train to the top of 
the slope, the descent being made by gravity. 
This is not the place to enter into details, which 
nevertheless would not be very abstruse and 
would form an interesting problem to be carried 
out by the young mechanic. 
• Too much importance should not be attached 
to the idea that wind is unreliable as a motive V 

II 



12 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

force^ _ It will be found more reliable than is 
usually supposed, and apart from that the sim- 
plicity of construction, in which no lathe and 
very few tools are required, as well as the ab- 
sence of cost in working, should all go to make 
the model windmill a popular object. 

The design shown in fig. lo is for a model of 
the size already mentioned, namely, with sails 
24 inches across the tips. It will be of course 
quite easy for the reader to make his model 
either larger or smaller, if he so desires, by tak- 
ing care to increase or decrease the dimensions 
of all parts in proportion. In a model like this 
it would only be introducing unnecessary com- 
plication if any attempt were made to provide 
the adjustments usual in large mills, and indeed 
it is quite possible that such regulating gear 
would take all the available power of the machine 
to work it. The design therefore dispenses with 
any such elaborations, but the maker can, if so 
disposed, and without any great difficulty, ar- 
range for the top of the mill to turn automati- 
cally, so that the sails always face the wind. A 
study of the later chapters of this book will show 
how this can be done. <_ 

* Almost all the materials used in the construc- 
tion are cardboard and wood, so that the model 
is not intended to be left permanently out in all 
weathers. If this should be desired, a larger 
use of wood must be made, and tin or sheet-iron 
well painted should also enter into the construe- 



14 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

tion. The baseboard in any case should be a 
substantial bit of timber, weighted if necessary, 
or otherwise, well secured to avoid overturning 
in a strong breeze. 

The main part of tower is formed of stout 
cardboard, which should be well varnished after 
erection. It is cut out as shown in fig. 12, and 
slight cuts along the division lines will enable 
the eight sides to be formed up. A strip of 
stout paper glued inside and outside will com- 
plete the joint. Note that the outside strips 
should be cut very neatly and all the same 
widths. They will then take the appearance of 
the finishing boards usually fitted at the corners 
of a wooden building. While still in the flat, 
the various windows, doors, etc., should be pen- 
cilled firmly on the diflferent sides, and particular 
care taken to fix any fitments for crane or other 
details. The whole model can be made very 
realistic if some little time is spent in lining out 
the tower and cap to represent weather-board- 
ing, or, if preferred, in the case of the tower, 
stone or brick. Pencil lines will be best, and 
colour may be put on to enhance the eflfect. 
Some idea of the eflfect to be aimed at is indi- 
cated in the lower part of fig. 11. 

The top and base of tower will be octagonal 
in plan, as shown in sketches, fig. 13. 

Details of the head or cap are given in fig. 14, 
which, together with fig. 11, will give a good idea 
of the manner of construction. Fig. 15 shows 




BACK END 



DETAILS OF HEAD OR CAP 



SCALE a/4"=1 FT. 

Fig. 14 



a ^ 

PLAN 



\.s?./ 




SLrCINO BEARING 

Fig. 12- Diagram for Setting-out Tower. < "o^ to sc*te > 
Fig. 13- Top and Base of Tower. 
Fig 14 - Views of Head or Cap. 
Fig 15 -Shape of Card for Roof of Cap. 
Fig 16 "Sliding Bearing. 



A SMALL WORKING MODEL WINDMILL I^ 

the shape of the two pieces of card to form the 
roof of cap before bending to shape. 

Pieces of cigar-box wood or thin pine form the 
base and ends of cap, and should be joined by 
very thin nails or stout pins, some deal sticks 
about ^-inch square being used as spreaders or 
stiffeners. The ends must be carefully set out 
from centre lines, and holes nicely drilled and 



T" 



«r» 



J, 



1 


(1 
1 

1 








t 




- 


<r Cf^^i" 




.t. 




-V. J/ 1 

4 OFF 


SCALE 3" — 1 





Fig. 17. — Shape of Sail for Model WindmilL 



cut to the dimensions given. Their uses will be 
apparent presently. One side of the roof should 
be made to open with a hinge of calico to enable 
the working parts to be got at. 

Details of the arms and sails are given in figs. 
17, 18, and 19, and readers unfamiliar with the 
" setting " of windmill sails should carefully 
study the drawings before shaping the arms. 
As shown in fig. 18, the sails are not placed cen- 
trally on the arm, which is much nearer one edge 
than the other. This is shown in the sectional 
view of arm and sail in fig. 18. Then also the 
two sails on one arm point opposite ways, which 
is perhaps best seen in the perspective sketch, 



l8 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

fig. ID. The amount by which the sail lies out of 
the plane of revolution is called its "angle of 
weather." To obtain this setting, each arm is 
bevelled away, the two ends being bevelled in 
opposite ways. Fig. 19 shows this, and the 
reader has only to imagine each arm brought 
successively into the same position, say the top, 
to realise how the bevel must always be the 
same way with the arm in that position. Fig. 
20 will also be helpful in making this clear. A 
portion of the arm at its middle is left the full 
square section (see figs. 18 and 20, which show 
this). Every care must be taken to make the 
bevelling correctly, or one pair of sails would 
be found bevelled one way and the other in the 
opposite way. This would of course result in 
nullifying the effect of both. The axle, shown 
in various figures, especially 18, 21, and 22, is 
made of a piece of hard wood like oak or hick- 
ory, and is shaped specially to take the two arms 
as indicated in fig. 22. Care must be used not 
only to cut this out true and a good fit, but also 
not to break the thin prongs. The shaft must 
be nicely rounded and sand-papered smooth. At 
the collar portion, which will form the forward 
bearing, a little paraffin wax should be melted 
into the grain to reduce running friction, or, 
better still, a thin brass ferrule fitted, as shown 
in fig. 18. 

The arms, in addition to being glued in place, 
must be further secured by wooden pins, and 



20 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

every care must be taken not only to fit them 
correctly according to the bevels, but also to 
get them dead square with the shaft and with 
each other. The use of an ordinary set-square 
will accomplish this. Both arms, as shown in 
fig. 22, are slightly " checked " or " halved " into 
each other, both to lock them more securely and 
to reduce the overhang of shaft. Notice should 
be taken that the cutaway is in the back of front 
arm and front of rear arm. 

The sails should be both glued and pinned to 
the arms for security and a pencil line at the 
t' right place on back of each sail will ensure get- 

ting them correctly placed. Each sail, previous 
to being mounted, should have parallel lines, 
about half an inch apart, drawn across both faces 
to imitate the slats generally used in large' mills 
of this type. After mounting, and when glue is 
firm, the sails and outer ends of shaft should 
have a couple of coats of good thin varnish to 
enable them to stand some weather. 

It may here be remarked that when pins are 
used instead of nails they will be found much 
easier to drive if a quarter of an inch of the sharp 
point is nipped off. If this is not done, they are 
almost sure to bend. 

It will be seen that the tail end of shaft is pro- 
vided with a metal bearing or journal in the form 
of a small headless nail. This must be let in bv 
first very carefully boring an axial hole in shaft, 
preferably with a twist drill, the end of shaft 



A SMALL WORKING MODEL WINDMILL 21 

being bound round to avoid splitting. This jour- 
nal runs in a tin bearing (fig. i6), which is made 
to slide stiffly up and down in the slot in back 
of cap. This allows the owner to put in or out 
of gear the winding shaft by means of which 
the mill is caused to perform useful work. This 
is accomplished through the disc A, fig. ii, fixed 
on the winding shaft, a rubber band in circum- 
ference of disc and thin rubber sleeve on main 
axle being provided to ensure sufficient adhe- 
sion. The winding shaft runs in two metal or 
wood bearings, and has the end of a strong 
thread secured to it for a rope. The other de- 
tails for the working of this part of the apparatus 
are perhaps shown clearly enough in the draw- 
ings. 

If carefully and neatly made, it is wonderful 
how interesting such a model will prove. In a 
stiff breeze the sails will revolve at a great rate, 
and the crane will lift say half a pound at a good 
speed. Weights will of course be in the form of 
small sacks of material, boxes, barrels, etc., and 
the crane should be made capable of slewing so 
that the loads can be deposited where required. 
Even in the light winds it is of interest to see 
the sails moving gently round, and indeed at 
such a time the appearance is rather more real- 
istic, which may partly compensate for the 
lessened utility. 



CHAPTER III 
A Small American Type Windmill 

The design given in this chapter is intended to 
form a link between the model pure and simple 
and the "small power" mill able to perform 
solid work. It has been thought desirable to 
admit a certain amount of pattern-making and 
machining in this case, as a windmill of this size 
ought to be made on " practical " lines, although 
it is as simple as possible in construction, and 
quite within the range of the amateur with a 
small back-geared lathe. The outside diameter 
of the sails is 3 feet. 

As in all the other cases, the present design 
may be modified here and there to suit individ- 
ual fancies, and it may also be reduced to form a 
very pretty model or enlarged to any reasonable 
size. Of course, any such change will involve 
certain alterations in sizes of parts — not neces- 
sarily to scale, as, for example, in the case of a 
mill three times the size, the thicknesses of metal 
would not in all cases need to be three times as 
great. 

A small machine like this may be recom- 
mended particularly for experimental work. The 
horse-power available in the usual 16-mile breeze 

22 



A SMALL AMERICAN TYPE WINDMILL 23 

may be estimated at %o H.P., but this may easily 
be doubled in any stiffish wind, so that for many 
small matters the power is not to be despised. 
With an efficient pump quite a respectable 
amount of water can be lifted, or an old boiler 
may be pumped up with air pressure, which will 
thus be available for running model steam-en- 
gines, or for testing purposes, or even a small 
blow-lamp, etc. There is no reason why a model 
dynamo and accumulator plant should not be 
designed to utilise the power. On an average, a 
breeze of i6 miles per hour or over is available 
for quite six hours a day throughout the year. 
Now a mill of the size here described would run 
a 6-watt dynamo easily, if of good, efficient con- 
struction ; so that the normal output for a week's 
work would be 6 watts X 6 hours X 7 days= 
252 watt-hours, provided the accumulator were 
able to store all it received. Such a result would 
be quite attainable during the majority of weeks 
in a year. 

To get the above result some simple apparatus 
in the way of automatic cut-in and cut-out gear 
would be required, and the cells would probably 
have to be so connected that they could be 
charged in parallel and discharged in series. 
Thus, the stored energy might be utilised at the 
rate of 24 volts, in which case the owner would 
be able to get a return of say 2.5 amperes for 
four hours (24 V. X 2.5 amp. X 4 hours = 240 
watt-hours). Undoubtedly there are many cases 



24 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

where such a result would be regarded as of 
great utility in the amateur's workshop. Some 
attention will be paid in the later pages of this 




" American." Windmill : Front View of 
Wheel. 



book to the detailed apparatus necessary to this 
end. 

The American type of mill has been adopted 
in the present instance as much for variety as 
for other reasons. It is not noticeably more 



26 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

efficient than some other fonns, but lends itself 
to simplicity of construction. No attempt has 
been made to have the sails self- regulating, but 
a tail has been adopted in order to keep the mill 
automatically head to wind, and this makes it 




easy to regulate the speed by hand or to throw 
the mill out of work entirely when desired. This 
refinement can, however, be dispensed with if 
desired. The size of the wheel is 3 feet in diam- 
eter, and its normal speed in a 16-mile breeze 
should be from 200 to 250 revolutions per minute. 
Front and side views of the complete mill are 
shown in figs. 23 and 24 respectively. The whole 



A SMALL AMERICAN TYPE WINDMILL 27 

of the mill has been designed in metal, as it is 
intended for constant outdoor work in all 
weathers. 

Commencing witli the " tower," this has been 
reduced to the simplest form by making use of 




Fig. 28.— Plan of ihe above- 

a piece of old 2-inch gas-, water-, or steam-pipe 
about 3 feet long.. It is desirable that this should 
have been galvanised, and it must of course be 
quite straight. The tube is carried in a strong 
wooden framework of 11 X i boards and some 
2X2 scantlings, so that it can revolve therein 
without shake or " give," since it will form the 
movable part of the mill and will carry the whole 
of the gearing. This wooden framing appears 
in fig, 24, and is further illustrated in perspective 
and in plan in figs. 27 and 28 respectively. 

The construction of the wheel is indicated in 



so WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

the vertical section through it in fig. 25 (which 
is twice the scale of the general arrangement, 
fig. 24), and also in the perspective drawing, fig. 




Fig. 29.— Perspective Sketch of Wheel and Sails of Model 
" American " Windmill. 



29. A hub, formed from three pieces of board, 
and turned 6 inches diameter, is secured to the 
shaft by means of an iron strip laid in the saw- 
cuts in end of shaft, as shown in fig, 30. Nails 
or screws make the three pieces of wood practi- 
cally one solid whole. 



A SMALL AMERICAN TYPE WINDMILL 



29 



Referring to fig. 29, it will be seen that the 




Fig. 30. — Method of Securing Hub on End of Shaft. 

wheel is carried by arms or spokes of f-inch X 
346-i"ch galvanised hoop-iron. Six of these 
spokes start from each side of hub, those on the 




Fig. 31.— Wire Rings for Wheel: Upper Diagram, Outer 
Rings; Lower Diagram, Inner Rings. 

front side being made of three full-length strips, 
as seen in figs. 23 and 26. Turning to fig. 25, it 
will be seen how these spokes cross from front 



30 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

to back, and vice versa. They are also soldered 
to four rings, clearly shown in fig. 29, wherever 
they cross these latter, and these rings are so 
designed as to carry the sails between them. 
The rings are of No. 6 B. & S. galvanised fenc- 
ing wire, carefully curved to accurate diameters 
— the outer 36 inches, and the inner 18 inches — 
and ends overlapped 2 or 3 inches, bound with 
fine wire and soldered together. The proper 
distances apart of the two sets of rings are ij 
inches and J inch respectively, as shown in fig. 
31, which shows also the angle at which the sails 
will lie between them, namely about 25**. The 
shape of the sails themselves is shown in fig. 
32: they should be of thin sheet-zinc, the four 
corners slightly bent to lie flat against the wire 
rings to give rather more surface for soldering. 

If the mill is to be used for " power " produc- 
tion in the ordinary way, it is very difficult to 
find a better means of transmitting the energy 
than by the usual method of bevel-wheels, as 
shown in fig. 24. The exact ratio of one wheel 
to the other is only determined by the require- 
ments of the case, and as shown in the drawings 
the vertical shaft would make three revolutions 
to two of the axle. The wind-wheel and its axle 
are carried in a light iron-casting, given in de- 
tail in fig. 33, the lower end of which is bored 
out to fit tight on the main 2-inch upright tube. 
The manner of this fitting, and the arrangement 
of bevel-wheels and brass bearings for upper and 



-1^^ 



^- 



■H*r"?^^?rf^-^" 



Fig. 33. Head Casting (Iron). 




Fig. 32 Shape of Sails for Model ■American" 



A SMALL AMERICAN TYPE WINDMILL 



33 



lower ends of vertical spindle, are shown in fig. 
34. There is nothing special in any of these 
parts, which are all simple turned work. 

The machine may be also used to pump water, 




FlC. 36. — Side View of Eccentric for Pumping Gear, 
in which case probably the simplest plan is to 
fit a small eccentric on wind-axle working a con- 
necting-rod with a small pump in lower end of 
2-inch tube. To save the reader trouble in de- 
signing, a simple eccentric, strap, and rod are 
shown in figs. 35 and 36, giving a lift of i^ 
inches, which of course can be varied to suit the 
needs of the maker. Too great a lift must be 
avoided, owing to the speed at which the pump 



34 



WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 



will work. Care must be taken to make the 
casting (fig. 33) higher than shown, if neces- 
sary to enable the eccentric to clear (see fig. 35). 




NO. 28 B. A 8. QAUOE 
OALV. IRON SHEET 



SCREW 
V4"l.0«0 
»/,"OIAM. 



■" CEN8. 



1—1- 



H-^-J 7^ 




SCALE 1V2"- 1 ft. 



z: 



HOLE .,f/ 

FULL Vb" / /" ^^^"^ ^O*-"*" 





TWO 1/4" RIVETS 



quadrant cut from 
Vi6"galv. plate 



GALV'D ANGLE IRON 
Vie" THICK 



r SECTION 



Fig. 37. — Elevation and Plan of Tail Regulator. 



Details are given in the drawings, and are prob- 
ably clearer than written explanations. 

The tail-gear, by which the mill is made to 
face the wind, is detailed in fig. 37, where the 
upper view is a side elevation and the lower a 
plan. The tail, formed of thin galvanised sheet- 
iron, is riveted to a piece of very light galvan- 



A SMALL AMERICAN TYPE WINDMILL 35 

ised angle of the section shown. This is not the 
usual rolled angle, but bent sheet, much lighter 
and more suitable for this work. It can be ob- 
tained from tank-makers or workers in galvan- 
ised sheet-iron. The tail is pivoted where shown 
by a bolt which allows sufficient movement and 
is locked in position by the screw shown, a 
tapped hole being provided in the casting (fig. 
33). To get the full effect of wind, the tail must 
lie square with the wheel, or in line with axle. 
Should the wind be too high, its effect on the 
wheel can be diminished by letting the tail turn 
to an angle of 45 ^^ or less with the wheel, insert- 
ing the screw in one of the radial holes in quad- 
rant, according to the strength of the breeze. 
The last hole (at right angles to tail) is the 
" off " position, as when the screw is in that 
place the tail will He parallel with wheel and the 
effect of wind on same will be nil. The wire stay 
shown in the drawings supporting back end of 
tail, may be found unnecessary, but is easily 
fixed. 

It will be very desirable to fit a brake to the 
mill. This need be only a very simple affair — a 
wooden pulley fitted at any convenient position 
on the driven shaft, with a rod or lever to press 
on rim either by weights or spring when desired. 
This may often be useful when it is required to 
stop the mill or to alter the setting of tail, or 
even in the workshop to regulate speed when 
experimenting. 



36 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

All parts of the mill subject to the weather 
should either be galvanised or very well painted 
if of iron, and a cap of galvanised sheet fitted 
over the bevel-wheels and casting will not only 
avoid unsightly rusting, but will save oil and re- 
duce friction. 



CHAPTER IV 
A Small Working Windmill 

The windmill next to claim attention is one 
that should appeal to a large circle of readers. 
It has purposely been designed in a very simple 
form, yet of a size sufficient to develop reason- 
able power, namely, %o horse-power in a moder- 
ately stiff breeze of say i6 miles an hour. Such 
a mill will do real work, such as pumping water, 
running a small grindstone, or even driving a 
30-watt dynamo. The total diameter of the 
wheel is 6 feet. 

In order to simplify the machine as far as 
possible, the mill has been designed with fixed 
head, so that the wind must be in one of two 
opposite directions to give a maximum effect. 
It should therefore be set up with the front 
wheel facing in the direction of the prevailing 
wind. Where the two principal prevailing winds 
are, say, S.W. and N.W., the best direction for 
the axis of the mill would probably be north and 
south. Local conditions should be studied, and 
detailed records of the prevailing winds of the 
locality can generally be obtained without diffi- 
culty. A fixed mill like this is also suitable for 
a town dweller, where long rows of houses con- 

37 



38 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

fine the wind to definite directions up and down 
the line of " back gardens." 

The vanes (see figs. 38 and 44) can be either 
fixed or allowed to revolve partially upon the 
arms. If fixed, the mill will run in opposite direc- 
tions with opposite winds, and while this need 
not matter for such operations as pumping, it 
would not be satisfactory in other work. A 
simple device has therefore been adopted, so 
that when the wind blows from what may be 
called the back of the mill the sails will auto- 
matically reverse and so cause the direction of 
rotation to be always one way. The maker who 
prefers to have the sails fixed may ignore this 
arrangement and screw the vanes firmly to the 
arms, which need only to be tapered oflf, and not 
rounded in section. The alternative arms re- 
quired in this case are sketched in fig. 46 (two 
views), and of course require less work on their 
construction. 

The mill, as shown in figs. 38 to 47, has six 
whips or arms mounted upon a triangular hub 
to which they are all bolted. The six whips are 
formed from three hardwood sticks, each mak- 
ing a pair of arms. The sticks will be i^ inches 
square in section, 6 feet long, the central portion 
for a length of 22 inches left square while the 
ends should be turned down taper, from ij 
inches diameter at the root to i inch diameter at 
the tips. Good, sound, straight wood should be 
selected. 



A SMALL WORKING WINDMILL 39 

The hub, shown in detail in fig. 39, should be 
very carefully made, to an equilateral triangle to 
the sizes given, of a piece of very sound hard- 
wood of some non-splitting timber. Beech would 
be suitable. The hole for axle must be truly 
bored and fit well so that the sails will all run 
in true plane and square to the axle. The three 
sticks must be bolted to hub, each with two 
f-inch galvanised bolts, with good-sized washers, 
every care being taken to fix each stick at right 
angles to shaft. For further security, another 
J-inch or f-inch bolt will join each pair of sticks 
at their crossing, it being noticed that in one 
case (see fig. 43) a piece of packing of same 
thickness as the sticks will be required. The 
bolt in this case must also be so much longer. 

The axle, or windshaft, as it was called in older 
days, will consist in this case of a short length 
of stout mild steel tubing. The size is not im- 
portant — it is shown i inch diameter outside, 
and should not be less. This is not so much for 
strength as for better attachment to the hub 
with its far-spreading sails. A piece of f-inch 
gas tubing will make a satisfactory axle if centred 
in lathe and a light skimming taken oflf to obtain 
roundness and to make good, clean journals. 

The hardwood hub should be fixed to axle by 
a couple of J-inch split pins going right through, 
as seen in fig. 39. These can easily be got in 
parallel with two of the sticks, and should fit 
well so as to allow no backlash. 



4^ WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

The bearings should certainly be of brass, and 
the most simple form they can very well take is 
that shown in fig. 47. This provides, of course, 
no adjustment — a refinement that can be adopted 
with advantage if desired, but which hardly 
needs illustration. These bearings are carried 
in hardwood " pedestals," and secured by hard- 
wood caps bolted down over them. A recess is 
made in cap and blocks are provided on base to 
prevent side movement of brasses. If possible, 
oil cups or other similar lubricators should be 
fitted, but they may be dispensed with if the oil 
can is kept going. A cover of thin sheet-iron, 
galvanised, may be fitted with advantage to the 
working parts. The details of forward bearing 
are sufficiently indicated in the three views, fig. 
47 ; the back end bearing being exactly the same. 
Every c^re should be taken to make all tight 
and avoid any rocking. 

The power of the mill may best be transmitted 
by means of a pair of bevel-wheels, as shown in 
fig. 41. This is the usual method, and of course 
various ratios of speed can be got according to 
the wheels used. As here shown, the wheels 
have a speed ratio of two to one; and a light, 
true-running shaft, say f inch or even ^ inch 
diameter, carries the lower wheel. If this shaft 
must be of any great length, or if much of it 
must be unsupported, a greater diameter is de- 
sirable; here again tubing can be substituted for 
solid rod. For pumping purposes a crank may 







1 


i 


f^ \ 


■ p«iirin^ 




■> '""'"'™ ^ 


i 




\\a o |! 


: O O 1 / 




■,' (^''" """" *'^-"-i-. 




• 


1' ^<.^.woaRin-^ 


i 




1 ^ 


\ h 


i 1 


I 


1 ' -'. 


/ ^ 


'1 


5 


^1 


/ 


M 


S 




;: / Fig 15 III 


> 








i 


y °i, 


•°^L 


- 






\^_^ 


y ^sfx 


lVi"DIA", sl 


' Fig. 44 33^^ 


iJi"Dui«. >.'; 


' :>--rv^'^\ \ 1 




K 


%x^ v3 \k 


w 


1 


ig-46 


Fig. 44 Sail Mounted on Whip, with Stops for 


AHomatic 


Reversing, Fig. 45 End View of one Sail and 


H.nge. 


Fig. 46 Two Views of Arm for Fined Sails. 





44 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

be arranged either as an overhung crank on tail 
end of shaft, by an eccentric as described in the 
last chapter, or by cranking the shaft itself, the 
throw being made suitable for the pump to be 
used. A light wooden connecting-rod should be 
used if this plan is adopted. 

The method of carr>'ing the vanes and also 
the device for automatically s\i'inging them to 
suit the wind are shown in figs. 40, 44, and 45. 
The vanes are each formed of one (or, if neces- 
sary, of two) f-inch boards, the edges being 
tapered off as shown in fig. 45. Any timber not 
liable to warp in sun and weather will be suit- 
able, one of the best being Califomian redwood, 
usuallv obtainable in wide sizes. 

The supports or hinges, clearly seen in fig. 44, 
are of }-inch X l-inch gal\*anised hoop-iron 
neatly bent to fit round the arms at the places 
assigned to them. They are attached to the 
vanes by J-inch flat-headed rivets or bolts, gal- 
vanised by preference, with large washers next 
the wood, as shown. A good screw projecting 
from the arm just beyond each bearing prevents 
the vane from slipping ofiF. It should be seen 
that each vane s^vin^rs easilv but without shake. 

Owing to the unbalanced shape of the sails, 
thev will swins: accordins: to the direction of 
the wind, and means are provided to allow them 
to take up a position either way at the best angle 
for general work. This is specially shown in fig. 
40> in which the black lines show how the sails 




Fig.l? -Three Views of Front End BesHng for 6.footWin( 



46 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

would set with the wind in the direction given, 
and the direction of rotation for same. The 
dotted lines indicate the condition when the wind 
blows from the opposite quarter. The device 
consists of pairs of short cross-bars screwed to 
backs of arms and bolted, with packing between, 
at their crossing. As the angle each way is im- 
portant, care must be taken, by cutting away the 
cross-bars or providing packing, if either is 
necessary, to secure an angle of about 25°. A 
template cut to the correct angle should be used 
to adjust the vanes in each case. 

The timber framing on which the mill is 
erected needs no description beyond that af- 
forded by the sketches, but it should be remem- 
bered that stiffness is essential not only for 
safety but also to avoid strain on the vertical 
shaft and loss of power. Cross-bars can be 
bolted in at intervals if this shaft is long, and 
bearings fitted upon them. 

A final word is necessary as to painting. For 
such an " outside job " as a windmill careful 
painting is essential, and in particular each piece 
of finished timber in the mill itself must be very 
carefully painted over before being built up. 
Three coats of the best paint will not be too 
much, and the last coat may be advantageously 
mixed with some thoroughly good " outside " 
varnish. The next season after erection, another 
two coats of paint should be applied, but prob- 
ably longer intervals may then elapse between 



A SMALL WORKING WINDMILL 47 

the applications. Attention should always be 
paid to regular oiling, and it will be wise to 
avoid working the mill unnecessarily by fitting 
a brake or locking mechanism in some convenient 
position indoors. Indeed, a brake may be very 
desirable as a means of preventing accident either 
to work or person if the windmill is used for 
driving a lathe or other machine. 



CHAPTER V 
A Practical Working Windmill 

To complete the series of small windmills suit- 
able for amateur workmanship, a really practical 
machine, capable of "power" production on a 
moderate scale, remains to be described. It is 
thought that a mill of lo-feet diameter, while 
probably taxing to the fullest the constructive 
ability of any average reader, might well be at- 
tempted by a serious worker with happy results. 
In this instance, while preserving the general 
principle of simplicity, completeness has been 
aimed at, and castings and forgings are adopted 
throughout without hesitation. This certainly 
involves some pattern-making, which, however, 
should be within the scope of any one able to 
carry out the necessary machining of the cast- 
ings. Some readers may be willing — ^and able — 
to reduce this part of the labour by adopting 
makeshift details, but it should be remembered 
that such a method is hardly more advisable 
than it would be in the case of building any 
other motor — say a steam-engine — for power 
production. 

The rating for a lo-foot windmill would be 
about i H.P., which probably appears small for 

48 




Fig. 4B.-Front Elevation of 10-foot Windi 



50 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

the amount of work involved and the material 
employed. It is, however, a conservative esti- 
mate, and is based on the standard i6-mile 
breeze, which holds good for something like 8 
hours per day on two-thirds of the days in the 
-year. Manufacturers probably rate a mill of 
this size much higher, and as long as no wind- 
velocity is stated, they may fairly claim to be 
correct. All practical modern windmills, how- 
ever, are constructed with automatic gear so 
that with any given velocity of wind a maxi- 
mum output is obtained, and any increase in the 
wind is more or less counteracted by the action 
of the automatic gear. It follows therefore that 
if our lo-foot mill is set to produce say ^ H.P., 
it can only do this with a wind of much higher 
velocity than i6 miles per hour, which is also 
much more rare. Nevertheless, it will be quite 
within the maker's power to get as much as this 
and more out of his machine, if he so desires 
and the wind is there. It will be merely a ques- 
tion of altering the controlling weight, but will 
also involve very much heavier stresses on the 
machine. This point must be borne in mind. 

A general elevation is given in fig. 48, to a scale 
of J inch to the foot. The tower is built up of 
four 3 inches X 3 inches vertical members, 12 
feet high, each placed at the corners of a square, 
with 4-inch space between each pair of uprights. 
These uprights are well braced by struts, also 
of 3 X 3 timber, starting below the circle of 



A PRACTICAL WORKING WINDMILL 53 

vanes, one strut on each side, and each bolted 
to two uprights, as shown. The lower ends of 
struts are lodged into two horizontal diagonals, 
which are halved over each other at their cross- 
ing so as to lie level. The lower ends of uprights 
with a little shaping will also fit alongside these 
diagonals and must be securely bolted to them 
with ^-inch bolts. Bolts or straps must also se- 
cure the diagonals to the feet of struts. Four 
J-inch bolts not less than 3 feet long miust be 
carried down at the four ends of the horizontal 
members, into pockets of rough concrete of 2 or 
3 cubic feet each. The holes above the concrete 
must be then very firmly filled in and rammed, 
and if the ground is soft or yielding, a greater 
depth and more concrete must be employed. It 
is perhaps needless to insist on the importance 
of having all this timber, but especially that in 
contact with the ground, thoroughly well tarred, 
or better still, properly creosoted, and all bolts 
should be galvanised. Large thick washers 
under the nuts of the f-inch bolts are required. 
A more detailed side elevation of the head, 
tail, and part of the arms is given in fig. 49, to 
a scale of f inch to the foot. This shows the 
movable head casting A carried on the bearing 
casting B. Both these are detailed still further, 
to a scale of ij inches to the foot in figs. 50 to 
54, and require little explanation. The stem of 
A is of course turned to ride easily in the bored 
hole in B, and is fitted with brass bushes for 



54 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

axle and for vertical shaft. The casting B is 
securely bolted to the tops of the 3X3 uprights 
with ^-inch bolts, care being taken to get it 
truly upright and central with the timbers. 
Packing pieces, C, in figs. 49 and 54, are used to 
ensure correct spacing. Note should be taken 
of the sheet of zinc or lead, D, figs. 49 and 50, 
which is first laid on tops of uprights, with suit- 
able hole in middle to allow stem of B to pass, 
and is then dressed down, as shown, to throw 
all water from the timbers. It should hang clear 
of the latter to avoid capillary action. 

The tail, employed to keep the mill up to the 
wind, is also shown in fig. 49 at E. It is car- 
ried by two light angles, ij inches X H inches 
X i inch, F and G, which are bolted respectively 
to the top and bottom of head casting A with 
f-inch bolts. The position of these angles is in- 
dicated (in dotted lines) in figs. 50 and 51 at F. 
A sheet of zinc forms the tail surface and is 
riveted to angles with J-inch rivets about 4J 
inches' pitch. Four stiflfeners of ij inch X i- 
inch hoop-iron run vertically across the surface, 
dividing it into three equal spaces. Both angles 
and stiffening strips should be galvanised. 

The shaping of one of the eight arms for the 
vanes is shown in fig. 55, and the outline of sail 
in fig. 56. The assembling of these parts is in- 
dicated in fig. 49, but it is necessary to turn to 
fig^- 57 to see in greater detail not only the 
method of fixing but also the formidable-looking 



A PRACTICAL WORKING WINDMILL 



55 



array of levers and rods constituting the auto- 
matic gear. Every one of the eight sails has its 
independent set of levers to actuate the central 



»« «/i 



^"x2 




r- 



— 2'3i'- 



■*i^ 



NOT TO SCALE 



Fig. 55. — Shaping of Arm or Whip. 



sliding rod, but while it must be admitted this 
means a rather long list of troublesome details, 
the complication is much more apparent than 
real, and is largely due to the difficulty of ren- 



CN 



ol 



HINGES 



'«// 



B'O 



«A08. 



HINQE 






Fig. 56. — Outline of Sail for lo-foot Windmill. 



dering in a drawing the working of levers that 
do not lie in the same plane. The reader is 
therefore asked to study with some care these 
drawings, which the author for his part believes 
to be presented as simply as possible. All that 
has really to be remembered is that the wind 



56 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

impinging on an unbalanced sail attempts to 
turn it on its hinges, as shown in plan in fig. 58. 
Regarding now the short side of sail (the so- 
called "leading sail"), it of course describes an 
arc of rather less than a right angle, until it 
lies flat in the plane of the wind's direction. The 
chord of this arc, or rather of that described by 
a projecting pin J (a piece of %6-inch rod bent 
as shown), forms the path of the lower arm of 
lever K, fully drawn in fig. 64, the other arm of 
which, being at right angles, must move verti- 
cally up and down as compared with the sail 
movement. This actuates the f-inch rod L (de- 
tailed in figs. 59 and 60), which in its turn works 
lever M. As before indicated, the planes of 
movement of the levers K and M are not coinci- 
dent, but while this makes their representation 
on paper less easy, it in no way affects the ob- 
ject, which is to produce on the sliding rod N 
an in-and-out movement according to the amount 
of the wind's pressure. The lever K is supported 
at the special angle required (seen in plan in fig. 
58) by a bracket O (fig. 64) bolted to arm. The 
top arm of lever is made with a return end in 
order to give a long bearing, and bottom end 
slotted to allow the necessary play for the pin 
J, due to the path of the latter being an arc. 

Returning now to the sliding rod N, it will be 
seen that the motion of the eight levers M is 
transmitted to it through the special turned nut 
P, figs. 62 and 63. The various possible posi- 



A PRACTICAL WORKING WINDMILL 57 

tions of the forked end of lever require that the 
section of this " nut " be turned to the curves 
shown. A lock-nut on the outer side enables P 
to be screwed up to the most suitable position, 
and there secured in place by the lock-nut. 

Examination will show that the tendency of 
any wind action on the sail is to force rod L 
nearer the centre of mill, and so to drive rod N 
to the right as looked at in figs. 49 and 57. This 
has to be met at the other end of N by the coun- 
teraction of a weight, R, carried by a cranked 
lever, S, indicated in a diagram in fig. 49, and 
more fully in figs. 67 and 69. The lever, the 
short end of which is doubled or looped (see left- 
hand view in fig. (>y^ in order to pass on both 
sides of the loose pin bearing T, is hung from 
the upper tail-angle F by a ^-inch screw, a se- 
curer bearing being obtained for this by tapping 
into the block U, which is riveted to angle, see 
section, fig. 68. The arrangement of end of rod 
N and pin block T is more clearly shown in fig. 
69. Fig. 65 gives an end view of pin bearing, T. 

The weight, R, should be cast double, one 
piece having a slot or recess cast on one side as 
shown in fig. 66. It is difficult to fix on the exact 
weight that may be required, as this depends 
not only on the views of the maker as to the 
power which he desires the mill to exert at its 
maximum, but also on the friction of the numer- 
ous joints in levers. It is, however, recom- 
mended that a trial be made with a weight of 



6o WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

about ID lbs., corresponding with the full lines 
in the drawings given. If the mill sails are 
found to open too easily with this weight — which 
is, however, doubtful — it can be shifted further 
along the lever arm, or if even this is found 
insufficient, another disc can be added as shown 
dotted on the left in fig. 66. A light galvanisci 
chain, running over a pulley in top angle 'oC 
tail and hanging with a loop to within 6 fe«l of 
the ground level, is used to lift weight wheik tlie 
owner desires to stop the mill, this actioa, of 
course, opening all the sails so as to present ooij 
their edges to the wind. The other end of chain 
is looped back to a point near outer end of tail 
to avoid entanglement with uprights or running 
shaft. A hook attached to chain in proper posi- 
tion, W, can be hitched under lower angle of 
tail by taking chain sideways a little and so hang 
the weight up for any length of time. 

The automatic action and its details should 
now be fairly clear, and the remaining parts of 
the mill are simple. The large central casting, 
X, appears in several figures, notably in section 
in fig. 57 and in front elevation in fig. 70. It is 
undoubtedly the most serious undertaking in the 
whole construction and must probably be " put 
out" into the hands of professionals. It should 
not, however, be a costly item, and if made as 
indicated will go far to making the mill a prac- 
tical job. This casting carries the eight arms 
and makes secure connection to the axle. It is 



62 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

backed up in its support of the arms by the 
smaller annular casting Y, fig. 71, which is bored 
to fit well over turned part of X. Three very 
well-fitted ^-inch screws at 120** secure the boss 
to shaft, a good tight fit between shaft and casting 
being essential. These screws must not project 
inside the shaft far enough to touch the sliding 
rodN. 

The casting X carries also the eight little 
brackets Z for the levers M. These brackets are 
of cast iron and may be " American " in char- 
acter in so far that the pins form part of the 
casting, a file probably being a good enough tool 
to finish them. 

A little further stiffening of the sail-arms is 
obtained by the use of the tension-rods TR, de- 
tailed in fig. J2, These ar^ only J-inch galvan- 
ised rods one end turned over for an inch at 
right angles and the other screwed and lock- 
nutted. The tension put on these must be even 
and not too great; but they, as well as other 
screws and bolts in the machine, will probably 
require tightening up once or twice when the 
weather has had its effect on the timber. 

A word is required in reference to this latter 
item. The arms should certainly be wrought 
from good sound seasoned ash. The sails can 
hardly be formed of better timber than Califor- 
nian redwood (Sequoia semper znrens), which 
can be obtained in wide boards. They will be 
4 inch thick with the edges chamfered oflf both 



A PRACTICAL WORKING WINDMILL 63 

Sides. Three battens, 2 inches X li of sound 
hardwood (ash, bluegum, etc.) must be well 
screwed across, and the hinges, three in number, 
will come opposite these, on the other side of 
sail. These hinges should be of the strongest 
make of T shape, galvanised. They are shown 
in the plan, fig. 58. 

So far the axle has hardly been mentioned. 
It is, however, a very simple matter, being 
nothing but a piece of 2-inch (outside diameter) 
steel steam-pipe, preferably solid drawn, and 
quite J inch thick. It should be true to begin 
with, so that the very lightest skimming in the 
lathe will make it a good journal. It carries the 
usual bevel-wheel, indicated in figs. 49 and 57, 
and gearing with another of the same size on 
the vertical shaft. Both wheels are 4 inches on 
inner diameters, but may be more or less if re- 
quired, the casting A being altered if necessary. 
The vertical spindle would be a piece of f-inch 
cold rolled steel shafting, and should have bear- 
ings also at bottom end and half-way down the 
tower, presuming the spindle is carried down to 
the ground as shown in fig. 48. A pair of bevel- 
wheels is also required to transmit power to a 
horizontal shaft. 

One or two points in conclusion deserve re- 
mark. First, that all possible metal parts should 
be either galvanised or of sheet zinc. The cast- 
ings will most probably be only painted. They 
should be "pickled," freed from rust and espe- 



04 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

cially from dirt and grease, and painted with 
good red lead paint well rubbed in. It is better 
still to warm the castings to about loo** Fahr. 
when putting the first coat on. Three coats of 
the red lead paint, thinly put on, and a finishing 
coat of grey or black paint are required to make 
a good job. The woodwork, it has already been 
remarked, should be tarred or creosoted. This 
does not apply to the arms and vanes, all of 
which require the usual painting in most thor- 
ough fashion. The most suitable paint is pure 
white lead with a dash of ochre. 

Steps, formed from any suitable timber, say 
3X2 inches, should be nailed up at least two 
sides of the verticals to enable the owner to 
reach the head of mill for oiling, etc. 

A mill of this power, especially if used to 
drive a lathe or other workshop tools, should 
have a simple cut-out device — such as a sliding 
coupling actuated by a handy cord or chain, so 
as to throw the mill out of gear in case of an 
accident. A brake is not so necessary, as the 
automatic gear is designed as much as possible 
to keep the machine at uniform speed. Under 
normal output this speed should be from 80 to 
100 revs, per minute, varying slightly according 
to the setting of the sails. These, in their flat- 
test position — that is, with a light wind — should 
lie at an angle of about 20° to the plane of 
revolution of the wheel. 



CHAPTER VI 

Production of Electricity by Wind-Pov/er 

To most readers the possibility of applying 
the power from a windmill to the production 
of electrical energy will be an interesting fea- 
ture, and it is fortunate that recent experimental 
work has proved that not only is this feasible 
but even simple, inexpensive, and reliable. By 
" reliability " it is not, of course, meant that the 
fickleness of the wind is completely overcome, 
but only ^that Jhe 3£garatuSj^ whigtu iacludes 
some automatic gear, can be relied upon not to"^ 
go wrong, rt is certainly possible — within rea- 
sonable limits — by employing a large enough 
mill and accumulator, to tide over even exten- 
sive calms, but probably any amateur engineer 
who decides to adopt the method to be de- 
scribed will be willing to accept a few inevitable 
" off-days " in each year, when no current will 
be available, balancing this trouble against the 
very definite advantage of the inexpensiveness 
of the powen ' 

Many experiments have been made at differ- 
ent times and in different places to utilise wind- 
power in the way now under discussion. There 
is, however, no need to deal with more than one, 

65 



65 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

which, having proved satisfactory' in practice, is 
in use in a fairly large number of instances in 
North Germany and in Denmark, not only for 
the supply of isolated farm-houses but even for 
village lighting and power production. In prac- 
tically all these cases an oil-engine is jised as a 
standby, yet it*is found that the number of days 
in the year on which this engine is called into 
use are so few that the reader who proposes to 
light a house or provide himself with power on 
a small scale may reasonably consider the extra 
expense unnecessary in his case. 

The following suggestions are based entirely 
on the excellent work recently done and pub- 
lished by Prof. P. la Cour in Denmark on behalf 
of that Government, which has in that partic- 
ular placed itself ahead of other countries — 
considerably to the advantage of many of its 
villages and isolated dwellings. The reader 
must be prepared to experiment a little — not 
indeed in principles but in details of apparatus 
to suit his own case — ^but may rest absolutely 
assured that the method is quite practical and 
satisfactory. 

There are two main difficulties in applying a 
power so variable and intermittent as wind to 
the production and supply of electricity. There 
must, first, be a means of automatically switch- 
ing on the dynamo to a set of accumulat6?s 
whenever the former is in a position to deliver 
current, the same apparatus cutting it out when 



PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY BY WIND-POWER 6y 

the power falls away, gecondly, means must be 
adopted whereby an increase of wind-power be- 
yond the normal amount required to just work 
the dynamo shall not affect the output by in- 
ctieasing either voltage or current. Both these 
ends have been attained by La Cour with the 
simplest apparatus imaginable. 

A consideration of the second question raised 
will show why it is necessary to decide on a 
definite wind-velocity as being that at which 
any given windmill shall supply its " normal " 
output. By rating it low, say a wind of 9 miles 
per hour, it is possible to keep a dynamo work- 
ing nearly every day in the year and for twelve 
hours out of the twenty-four. But the power of 
the wind at 9 miles an hour is only a quarter 
of that at 15 miles an hour, and although the 
latter only blows about half the total number 
of days in a year, and then for only about nine 
or ten hours a day, its total output is greater 
than the other. Another point to be considered 
IS that a very small dynamo is much less effi- 
cient, so that a double loss is experienced if too 
much constancy of work is aimed at. Of course, 
in a large installation these points have less 
emphasis, and it becomes desirable to run the 
plant at a lower wind-rating (in other words, 
use a comparatively large mill), the only limit- 
ing factor being the initial cost of the plant. 

In a wind-driven generating plant the follow- 
ing points should be noted. The windmill itself 



68 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

should be self-regulating (as, for example, that 
described in Chap. V.), and fitted with tail so as 
to turn to face all possible winds. The dynamo 
should be shunt-wound, so that an increase in 
the external resistance tends to raise the ter- 
minal voltage. If necessary, this tendency may 
be increased by having one or two resistance 
coils in series with the shunt-winding, these 
coils being automatically cut out as the external 
resistance rises and current falls. A low-speed 
machine is certainly preferable, the speed of a 
windmill being rather low itself. The accumu- 
lator is a vital point: it should have a large 
capacity, as on this depends its ability to main- 
tain a supply over a longer period of calm; yet, 
as it is undesirable for anv accumulator to re- 
main long at a low state of charging, care must 
be taken to avoid draining it — especially if a 
spell of calm weather seems likely. 

The whole of the electrical apparatus is 
shown diagrammatically in fig. 73, the only part 
needing much description being the automatic 
switch, further illustrated in three views in fig. 
74. This consists of two electro-magnets, EM, 
each like an ordinary bell-iiiaq:nct, and wound 
with fine wire, but w^ith an extra winding of a 
few turns of thick wire, exactly like a compound- 
wound dynamo field magnet. A horse-shoe per- 
manent magnet, PM, is suspended so that its 
poles lie opposite and near to the poles of the 
electro-magnets, and swings by means of the 



70 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

pivot screws which work in a brass (or non- 
magnetic) block, B. This block also carries the 
copper rod CR, each end of which turns down- 
ward into the wooden cups i and 2, containing 
mercury, matters being so arranged, however, 
that the end i is always in the mercury which- 
ever way PM is swung, while 2 only touches 
the mercury when that end of CR is drawn 
downwards. 

The switchboards present no special features. 
By following out the connections it will be seen 
that any agreed number of cells can be switched 
on to the dynamo, while any independent num- 
ber can be caused to supply the lamps. This 
latter arrangement is desirable to allow for drop 
of voltage during discharge, also to provide for 
losses in mains and for an extra cell or two in 
case of accident to others. 

The action of the automatic switch is as fol- 
lows: Assuming the dynamo to be still, or 
running at too low a speed to furnish current, 
it will be seen that the battery is energising the 
electro-magnets EM through the fine wire-coils, 
the current passing also through the armature 
of the dynamo. The winding of EM is such 
that the current in this direction attracts the 
poles of PM to the right and so raises the end, 
2, of CR out of the mercury. Only a very 
small current is required, or allowed, to be thus 
wasted. Supposing now the wind to increase 
sufficiently to raise the speed of dynamo so 



72 WIXDMILLS AXO ^IXO MOTORS 

much as to be able to supply cnrrent. the first 
effect will be to reduce the current in EM to 
nil and then to reverse it, altering the polarity 
of the electro-magnets and throwing the lower 
end of magnet PM over to the right. This, by 
dipping the end 2 of CR into the mercury, 
makes connection between the d>Tiamo and ac- 
cumulator, the charging of which at once begins. 
The eflFect of the thick-wire coils on EM is to 
hold the magnet switch more securely during 
charging. The opposite action — that of throw- 
ing out the d>Tiamo when the speed fails — ^is 
obvious on inspection. 

The apparatus required to maintain the dy- 
namo at the right speed when that of the mill 
itself ranges too high is a system of belts and 
pulleys, shown in fig. 75. Here A is an ordinary 
pulley with the usual cur\'ed face; B, a rather 
wide, flat-surfaced pulley; C and D, again, ordi- 
nary pulleys; C and B being fast on one shaft. 
This shaft is carried on the light timber frame 
EF, hinged at E, and canying a weight G at 
the other end. 

It will be seen that this arrangement provides 
for a constant pull on the belt between A and B. 
It may be found that this pull is too great even 
without the weight G, in which case a cord 
(shown dotted) takes its place, and, by means 
of a pulley overhead and another weight, takes 
off some of the load. 

The belt CD has no special feature beyond 



PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY BY WIND-POWER 73 

being thin, supple, and even. That between A and 
B, however, must be specially smooth on its run- 
ning surface, and must in addition be thoroughly 
well oiled. On this depends the peculiar result to 
be obtained. It is found that when the weight G 
has been properly adjusted, and other details of 
current supply, etc., decided upon by experiment, no 
matter how much faster than normal A is compelled 
to run by the wind, the speed of B remains con- 
stant or with just sufficient variation to meet 
the slightly varying conditions required by the 
dynamo, the belt slipping on B at the higher 
speeds. The principle, of course, is not new; 
but its application in the present instance, to- 
gether with the automatic switch, is an excellent 
example of mechanical adaptation. 

The details of the whole of the apparatus 
must necessarily be worked out by individual 
requirements: the following suggestions, how- 
ever, are added as an example, the instance 
chosen being the lo-foot windmill described in 
the last chapter. This windmill, working in a 
15- or 16-mile breeze, should have an output of 
about i H.P. Allowing for losses in dynamo, 
gearing, and belts, it may be assumed that a 
dynamo of lOO-watts output would be the right 
machine for the available power. The voltage 
chosen might well be 25, this being its lowest 
rate at normal speed, which may be assumed at 
1500 revs, per minute. 

Under these circumstances, and assuming 



■»i« 



74 



WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 



pulley A (fig. 7s) to run at 200 revs, per min- 
ute (by whatever gearing used), A might be 12 
inches diameter X 2 inches width ; B, 6 inches X 




Fig. 75. — Driving Belt Arrangement for Wind Electrical 

Plant. 

• 

3 ; C, 8 inches X 2 ; and D, the dynamo pulley, 
2 inches X 2 inches. This gives a rather higher 
ratio than is required — an error on the right 
side. The belt between A and B should be i% 
inches X %o inch, the pulleys being about 6 feet 
centres, and belt CD i inch wide X Vh i^^ch thick, 
also with about 6 feet drive. 



PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY BY WIND-POWER 75 

There would be twelve accumulator cells, 
each of from 150 to 200 ampere-hour capacity, 
which would be easily capable of dealing with 
the full current for twenty-four hours' continu- 
ous charging. The capacity mentioned is the 
maximum suitable for the given plant, but the 
minimum may be anything down to twelve 
pocket-batteries, if so desired. Within the 
limits given, the greater the capacity the more 
the independence of conditions of wind. 

With regard to the automatic switch, a little 
experimenting and adjusting will be needed to 
ensure its correct working. The electro-magnets 
may be two ordinary bell-magnets, wound with 
No. 36 wire, the bobbins being about ij inches 
long and i inch diameter outside. A resistance 
may be needed in series with this winding, or 
the effect may be tried of connecting up only 
six of the cells to these coils, the six on the left- 
hand side in fig. 73 being, of course, selected. 
All four bobbins will be joined in series. Over 
the fine wire on each bobbin will be wound from 
six to twelve turns (to be determined by experi- 
ment) of No. 16 or 14 gauge cotton-covered 
wire, the winding being in same direction as 
the fine wire in each case, so that the current 
is a reinforcing one when being supplied from 
the dynamo. The balance of the permanent 
magnet can be adjusted by moving the copper 
rod CR either to right or left. 

The output from such an installation may of 



76 WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 

course be anything up to the safe discharge rate 
of the battery employed. Assuming the normal 
conditions of charging to be, say, lOO watts for 
ten hours (equal to looo watt-hours), and that 
this charge is to be used in two evenings, there 
would be available 500 watt-hours per evening, 
less the losses in transforming, or, say, 80 watts 
for five hours. Fortunately at the time of year 
— winter — when longer lighting is necessary 
more wind-power is also available. Of course, 
only metallic-filament lamps should be used, 
when it will be seen that with proper propor- 
tioning of the plant quite a respectable output 
in light is to be obtained. The lamps for the 
above installation would be 16 volt. 

If the loan of an anemometer cannot be ob- 
tained, a simple form of wind-pressure meter 
should be used to determine the right weight 
(R, fig. 49) required to just hold the windmill 
sails at the velocity decided upon. Such an 
apparatus is sketched in fig. 76. It is merely a 
sheet of stout cardboard, 2 feet X i foot, hung 
on one of the narrow edges by a hinge of linen, 
the middle of the lower edge being connected 
as shown to a small spring letter balance capa- 
ble of reading up to at least one pound. A table 
of wind-pressures and velocities is given below, 
by which any pressure registered can be con- 
verted into velocity. The pressure-board must, 
of course, squarely face the wind blowing at the 
time of the experiment. Note that the spring 



PRODUCTION OF ELECTRiaTY BY WIND-POWER yj 

balance is just at zero when no wind is im- 
pressed on the board, or a false reading may 
be obtained. If made to the given sizes, the 




<r--t2-- 



O 
CI 




-LINEN HINQE 



DIRECTION 

■< 

OF WIND 



SPRING BALANCE 

Fig. 'jd. — A Simple Wind-pressure Gauge. 



readings will be direct measurements of the 
pressure per square foot. 

The brake horse-power of a windmill can be 
taken in exactly the same way as that of a 
steam-engine, the only difficulty being the usual 
unsteadiness of the wind. At a time when the 
wind is fairly steady and about right in velocity, 



78 



WINDMILLS AND WIND MOTORS 



such a test should be made, one observer watch- 
ing the pressure-meter and noting the pressure, 
say, every half-minute, another reading the 
spring balance of the brake at similar intervals, 
the test lasting for a quarter of an hour. Aver- 
age results may then be obtained, which may 
be extremely useful for determining the size of 
dynamo required, it being remembered that the 
power of the wind varies (theoretically) directly 
as the cube of its velocity. In practice the vari- 
ation rate lies between this and the square of the 
velocity. 



Table of Wind Pressure and Velocities. 



Miles per 


Feet per 


Feet per 


Force in 

lbs. per 

sq. foot. 


hour. 


minute. 


second. 


1 


88 


1.47 


.005 


2 


176 


2.93 


.020\ 
.044/ 


3 


264 


4.4 


4 


352 


5.87 


.079\ 
.123/ 


5 


440 


7.33 


10 


880 


14.67 


.4921 
1.107/ 


15 


1320 


2? 


20 


1760 


29.3 


1.9681 
3.075/ 


25 


2200 


36.6 


30 


2640 


44 


4.4281 
6.027/ 


35 


3080 


51.3 


40 


3520 


58.6 


7.8721 
9.963/ 


45 


3960 


66 


50 


4400 


73.3 


12.300 


oO 


5280 


88 


17.712\ 
24.108/ 


70 


6160 


102.7 


80 


7040 


117.3 


31.4881 
49.200/ 


100 


8800 


146.6 



Description. 



Hardly perceptible. 
Just perceptible. 

Gentle breeze. 

Pleasant breeze. 

Brisk gale. 

High wind. 

Very high wind. 
Storm. 
Great storm. 

Hurricane. 



5It 



■^ 



LEARN TO DO THINGS 



Model Library Series 

OF COPYRIGHTED BOOKS 

1 . The Study of Electricity for Beginners. 

2. Dry Batteries, How to Make them. 

3. Electrical Circuits and Diagrams, Part 1 . 

4. Electric Bells, Annunciators and Alarms. 

5. Modern Primary Batteries. 

6. Experimenting w^ith Induction Coils. 

7. Electric Gas Igniting Apparatus. 

8. Small Accumulators, How to Make and Use 

9. Model Steam Engine Design. 

10. Practical Electrics. 

1 1 . Inventions, How to Protect and Sell Them. 

12. Woodwork Joints, How to Make and Use. 

1 3. The Fireman's Guide to the Care of Boilers. 

14. The Slide Valve Simply Explained. 

15. The Magneto Telephone. 

16. The Corliss Engine and Its Management. 

17. Making Wireless Outfits. 

18. Wireless Telephone Construction. 

19. The Wimshurst Machine, How to Make It. 

20. Simple Experiments in Static Electricity. 

21. Small Electrical Measuring Instruments. 

22. Electrical Circuits and Diagrams, Part 2. 

23. Induction Coils, How to Make Them. 

24. Model Vaudeville Theatres. 

25. Alternating Currents, Simply Explained. 

26. How to Build a Bi-plane Glider. 

27. A B C of the Steam Engine. 

28. Simple Soldering, Hard and Soft. 

29. Telegraphy for Beginners. 

30 . Low V oitage Lighting with Storage Batteries. 

33. House Wiring for Electric Light. 

34. Magnets and Magnetism. 

36. Small Windmills and How to Make Them. 
Injectors, Their Construction and Use. Keppy. 
Refrigeration and Ice Making. Wakeman. 

SPON R CHAMBERLAIN 

PUBLISHERS OF TECHNICAL BOOKS 

123-5 LIBERTY St.. new York 



^» ^ n I v ^^ 



No. 1. 



Price, 25 



THC 



Study or Blegtrigh 



rOR BEGINNERS. 



Comprising the Elements of Electricity and Magnettsm as Ap 
to Dynamos, Motors. Wiring, and to all Branches 

of Electrical Work. 



BY 



NORMAN H. SCHNEIDER. 



With Fifty-four Original Illustrations and Six Tabic 




No. 2. 



Price, 25 cts. 



DRY BATTERIES, 

tSfitOALU ADAPTH) POR 

Automobile, Launch and Gas Engine Work; Medical Coils. B 
Annunciators, Burglar Alarms, Telephones, Electrical 
Experiments and all purposes requiring 
a Good Battery. 



WITH THIRTY OEIGINAL ILLUSTKATIONS. 




No. 3. 



Parti. 



Price, 25 ct 



ELECTRICAL 

Circuits and DiAtiRAJw 

ILLUSTRATED AND EXPUINED. 



New and Original Drawings, comprising Alarms, Annuncial 

Automobiles, Bells, Dynamos, Gas Lighting, Motors, 

Storage Batteries, Street Railways,- Telephone, 

Telegraph, Wireless Telegraphy, 

Wiring and Testing. 



NORMAN H. SCHNEIDER, 



nitr~n 1 


^^U ^ 




1 


H'HiH'ltlH 




4s J 


I=X 


L_^l./VW^] 


^ i 



No. 4. Price, 25 cts. 

HOW TO INSTALL 

ELEGTRie Bells, 
ANNUJvem tors, 

AND Alarms. 



Batteries, Wires and Wiring, Circuits, Pushes, Bells, Burglar 

Alarms, High and Low Water Alarms, Fire Alarms, 

Thermostats, Annunciators, and the Location 

and Remedying of Troubles. 

By NORMAN H. SCHNEIDER. 




No. 5. 



Price, 25 cts. 



MODERN 

Primary Batteries. 

THtIR GONSTRUGTION. 

USB AND MAINTENANCE. 

Including Batteries for Telephones, Telegraphs. Motors. Electric 

Lights, Induction Coils, and for all 

E:^rimental Work, 

BY 

NORMAN H. SCHNEIDER. 




No. 6. 



Price, 25 cts. 



EXPERIMENTING WITH 

iNDUGTioiN Coils. 

Containing practical dlrectloiis for operating Induction Coils and 

Tesla Coils ; also showing how to make the apparatus ' 

needed for the numerous experiments described. 



H. S. NORRIE, 

Author of '■ Induction Cmts and Col Making." 



Fully llli>strated with Original Drawings. 




MODEL LIBRAinr PllOe, XO CCS. 

No. 8 

SMALL 
ACCUMULATORS. 

Hav to !<t2ke, Chsi^ sM Use Tbecc, vlth Qossary 

cf Techcical Ter~^ Useful Receifits 

ax Merccrarda. 

BY 

PERCIVAL MARSHALL, A. 1. Mech. E. 



Revfsd ai^ Eniatged Eifiduk 





Price 25 Cts. 



nODEL 



TEAM ENGINE 
DESIGN 



HANDBOOK FOR THE DESIGNER OF SMALL. 
STEIAM EINGINES, 

By R. M. deVIGNIER. 




THE 

MODEL LIBRARY 

No. 10 



Price 26 Cents 



Practical Electrics 

A. Universal Handy BooK 

ON 

ELECTRIC BELLS. BATTERIES. ACCUMULATORS. 

DYNAMOS. MOTORS, INDUCTION AND INTEJJSITT COILS. 

TELEPHONES, MICROPHONES. PHONOGRAPHSw 

PHOTOPHONES. ETC. 




THE 

MODEL LIBRARY ^"^ 2 6 Ctaits 

No. 11 



INVENTIONS 



HOW TO 



Protect, Sell and Buy Them 



A PRACTICAL AND UP-TO-DATE GUIDE 



FOR INVENTORS AND PA TENTEES 



BY 



FREDERIC B. WRIGHT 

Attorney -at- Law y Counsellor in Patent Causes 



\ 



THE 
MODEL LIBRARY 



Price, 25cts. 



Woodwork Joints 

HOW TO MAKE ft^D WHERE TO USB THEM. 

CONTAINING 

Full (nstructions tor making Moillse and Tenoo, Lap, Dovetail, 
Scarfing, and Glue Joints, with a Chapter on 

Circular Woodwork. 




THE 

MODEL LIBRARY 

No. 13 






PRICE 25 CTi 

THE FIREMAN'S GUIDE 

AND HANDBOOK ON THE 

CARE OF BOILERS 

BY 

KARL P. DAHLSTROM, M. E. 




™E Price 25 Cents 

MODEL LIBRARY 

No. 14 jjj^ 

SLIDE VALVE 

Simply Explained 
A Practical Treatise for Locomotive Engineers 

AND 

Students of the Steam Engine 

By 
W. J. TENNANT, Amo. M. I, M. E., and J. H. KINBALY, M. E. 

Revised and Considerably Enlarged Including a Number of 
New Illustrations 




Model Library Price 25 cts. 

No. 16 

THE 

CORLISS ENGINE 

AND ITS 

MANAGEMENT 

BY 

JOHN T. HENTHORN 

AND 

CHARLES D. THURBER 



THIRD EDITION WITH AN APPENDIX 




No, 17. 



Price 25 Cents 



Making 
Wireless Outfits 



A COSCISB AND SIMPLE EXPLANATION ON THE 
CONSTRUCTION AND USE OF 



'E WIRELESS EOU 



U^P TO 100 MILES 



B 



V 



NEWTON HARRISON. E. E. 



^ ■ ^ ' ' 











taMTM 



C**TM 
CONNiCTlOM 



•tl«» 



COMfM« 



Mr 



The 
MODEL LIBRARY 

No. 18. 



Price 2 5 Cents 



Wireless 
Telephone Construction 



A Comprehensive Explanation oi the Making ol a 

Wireless Telephone Equipment for Receiving and Sending 

Stations with Details ol Construction 



NEWTON HARRISON, E. E. 

With 43 Original Illustrations 




MrSCEI. ISKJUT 



PiA^TSd 



Tbe 



WLMSBIRST MACfflNE 

HOW TO 3UKE AND LSE IT 






1 


c 


^^N^JuC^^^^B 



THE 

MODEL LIBRARY 

No. 30 



Price 26 Cents 



Simple Experiments in 

Static Electricity 



A Series of Instructive and Entertaining Electrical 
Experiments for Students and Amateurs 



P&RCIVAL G. BULL, M.A.Oxoii. 



FULLY ILLUSTRATED 




THE 

MODEL LIBRARY 

No. 21 



PRICE 25 CTS 



Small 

Electrical Measuring 

instruments 



A Practical Handbook describin^i^ the viaking and using of 
Galvanometers , Voltnietc7'S , A inpercvi ctcrs , Wheat stone Bridgei 
and other Instruments for detecting and measurifig 

lUcctrica I Cii r;r ;^ ts , 

FUL L Y ILL I KS TRA TED 




»«■ 



THE 
MODEL LIBRARY 



Price 25 Cents. 



Electrical 

Circuits and Diagrams 

PART II. 

Alternating Current Generators and Motors, Single Phase 

and Polyphase Transformers, Alternating Current and 

Direct Current Motor Starters and Reversers, Arc 

Generators and Circuits, Switches, Wiring, 

Storage Battery Meter Conr 



NORMAN H. SCHNEIDER. 




=^ 



THE 

MOOBL LIBRARY 

No. 23 



Price 25 cts. 



INDUCTION COILS 



HOW TO MAKE AND USE THEM 






full particulars, tahles of winJintcs and illustrations showing the construdlaa 

of Coils giving sparks from one-half inch to twelve Inches, Indudioc 

COILS FOR ALKtMUBIl.tS AND GAS ENGINES. 



New edition tliomughly leviseJ and enlarged by 

KURT STOYE, 

Instructor Baron Je Htrsh Tradi? SJiool, New York. 




The Model Library 
, No. 24. 



Price 25 Cts. 




I 



MODEL LIBRARY 
SERIES 



Price 25 Cta. 



ABC 

OF THE 

STEAM ENGINE 

AND 

AUTOMATIC GOVERNOR 



Six scale drawings of a High Speed Steum Engine and Automatic 

(iciveTiior. Eacli pact is K'^'^" '" detail with its name and number 

for easy reference, with description. With a chapter on Lubrication 

and other practical information, 

BY 

J. P. LISK, M.E. 



A: 




THE 

MODEL UBRART 



Price 25 Cts, 



How To Build 



BI-PLANE GLIDER 



A PRACTICAL HANDBOOK ON ITS 
CONSTRUCTION AND USE 

BY 

ALFRED POWELL MORGAN 

IVHA Full Detail Drawings 




MODEL LIBRARY 

SERIES 
No. 29 



Price 35 Cts. 



Telegraphy for Beginners 



STANDARD METHOD 

AN 

AUTHORITATIVE BOOK OF INSTRUCTION IN THE 

METHODS AND FORMS MOST APPROVED. 

WITH LESSONS; INCLUDING THE MORSE 

AND CONTINENTAL CODES. 

BY 

WILLIS H. JONES 

WiRK Chief Wbstern Union Tbly. Co. New York. 





THE MODEL LIBRARY 
No. 30 Price, 35 cents 



lo'w voltage 
Electric Lighting 

WITH THE 

STORAGE BATTERY 



SPECIALLY APPLICABLE TO COUNTRY HOUSES 
FARMS, SMALL SETTLEMENTS. YACHTS. ETC. 



NORMAN H. SCHNEIDER 

FULL Y ILL USTRA TED 








<1 



WIRING HOUSES 



FOR 



THE ELECTRIC LIGHT 



Wt 



NORMAN H. SCHNEIDER 



\ 



1 

» 



fc 



\ 




\^ \ 



Man 



MODEL LIBRARY 

SEl 
No. 34 



Price 25 Ct8. 



Magnets & Magnetism 

SIMPLY EXPLAINED 

Including the theory of Magnets, Pennanent Magnets, 
Electro- Magnets, Solenoids, and Experiments with Magnets. 



ALFRED W. MARSHALL. A.M.I.E.E.. M.I.Mech.E. 



JVilA Fourty-nine Illustrations 




Model Libraiy 
No. 36 



FHceZScts. 



>VIXDMILLS 
>VIIVD MOTORS 

How to Bidld and Rim Them 

F. E. POWELL 



•■9 I26ST2 005 
SO S3 £!1 




f^S^-D 



^11 



j i ^g g 



i 



ijljrrrt -B*TE°"E 1 










■^Hm 














APQ^ 




















-4BIN 






















J|ULa-i 


jm^^ 



















STANFORD UNIVERSITY UBRARIES 
STANFORD, CALIFORNIA 9430S-<004 



